Hello, everyone.
In this lesson, we are going to continue working on our chat feature to be more specific.
We are going to focus on actually sending and receiving data.
So in our previous lesson, we set things up so that you can click the chat icon to open this chat box.
And we also set up the ability to hide or close the chat box.
So now in this lesson, let's address what should happen if we actually type a message into this field
down here.
Hello, how are you?
Now, as of this moment, this is just an HTML form and textfield.
So if I pressed enter to submit the form, that's going to reload the entire page and we can even see
up in the address bar with the question mark, that means it tried to perform a traditional git request
to send that data to a server somewhere.
None of this is what we want.
So let me open up the chat again.
Instead, when someone types in a message here and then presses enter to try and submit the message,
we would want to handle that event with front end JavaScript.
Right.
We want to send this data, their message to the server on the fly or asynchronously.
We don't want to reload the page.
So we've already learned technology that would let us do this right.
We could use the axios package and send off an asynchronous JavaScript request to the server.
And that would work because our server is always listening for incoming requests.
So the server would receive this message that we sent it.
But the server would then need to send this message to any and all users who also have the chat feature
open currently.
But how how could the server do that?
Because think about it, the Web browser is not always listening for incoming data from the server.
Traditionally, the browser only listens for data from the server immediately after it sends a request
and then expects to hear a response from the server.
And as soon as that request response lifecycle is over, the browser is not listening any longer.
Now, to get around this limitation, we could get creative and programmed things so that every five
or 10 seconds the browser sends off and axios request to check for any new messages, write messages
from other users.
But that would not be very efficient and that would not be using the right tool for the right job.
So instead of using a traditional HTTP request, we're going to open a socket connection between the
browser and the server.
Once we've established a socket connection, both the server and the browser will be listening for data
from one another.
Now, the easiest way to create this type of connection within a node app is to leverage a package named
Socket Io.
So right now, let's jump into our text editor and let's go out to the JavaScript grocery store or NPM
and download socket IO.
So open up the command line.
If your node server and app is already running, just press control, see.
OK, and we want to now install a package, so type out this command with me.
NPM install and the name of the package is socket dot i o then go ahead and press enter.
OK, now that we have that package, let's go ahead and start our server or app up again, so just be
sure to run npm run watch.
OK, now, in order to begin leveraging Socket Io, I want you to jump into our app JS file to refresh
your memory app just lives within the root folder of our project within app.
Jess, I want you to scroll down to the very bottom and right before the closing module down exports
line, I want you to add a new line now.
At the moment, our server is just an express application, right?
It's serving up our express app.
However, we now also want the server to power socket connections.
So we need to change things up a bit in order to do both of those things.
Let me show you what I'm getting at.
Let's create a new constant variable.
So const let's name it server.
So const server equals and then let's require in a package that is included in node by default.
So we don't need to go install this.
We can just say require in the name of the packages htp after the parentheses say dot create server
and inside those parentheses include app.
So we just created a server that is going to use our express app as its handler.
So now on the very bottom line where we say module exports equals instead of app, let's change this
to server.
Now, right above this line is where we can add a new line and now add in socket functionality to this
server.
So let's create another constant variable, let's say const Io short for socket IO and let's say that
should equal and then let's require in the socket IO package.
And then at the very end of this line, let's open up another pair of parentheses and in these parentheses
just say server.
So now in our debuggers file that actually tells our app to begin listening on PT..
Three thousand.
Well now instead of it telling app to listen, it's going to tell our overall server to begin listening
on PT..
Three thousand.
In other words, it's now going to power both our express app and our socket connections.
Now, just as a test right below this line, let's dropdown.
And when a Web browser opens a socket connection with our server, let's log a sample message to our
command line, our servers command line that says new user connected.
So we can just say Io dot on.
And then in this case, the event that we are listening for is connection.
And then the second argument.
So karma is just a function that we would want to run in response.
So function parentheses, curly brackets, let's just log to the console.
So console that log a new user connected.
Cool.
At this point, let's go ahead and save this file.
And now we need to make sure that our front end is loading socket IO JavaScript so that it can connect
to the server.
Let me show you what I'm getting at right now.
I actually want you to jump in to your views folder and inside the views folder.
Look in the includes subfolder and I want you to jump into Fuda SJS.
Remember when we set up this if statement, so only if the user is logged in should they see the chat
wrapper.
Well within that if statement, maybe right below this div line right here.
I want us to include a script, so an opening and closing script tag on the opening script tag.
Let's give it a source or sirc attribute.
So source equals and then quotes and type this in with me forward slash to look at the root of our server
and then socket dot io slash socket dot io dot js.
So now that our server is using socket io, it's going to make sure that a JavaScript file designed
for the web browser is available from this U.
RL.
This way the web browser has all of the tools that it will need to actually open the connection.
So let's go ahead and save this file and not to complete our test.
Let's jump into our chat JS module file so this lives within your front end JS folder and then within
the modules subfolder within this chat JS file, I want you to scroll down and find our method that
is named open connection.
Remember, this is where we have that annoying alert message that says opening a connection.
Let's go.
I didn't get rid of that alert and in its place, we can just call a function named IoE.
Now, if you're using VSG code, if you try to type a parentheses after this to call it, this code
is going to do some weird auto suggest completion nonsense.
I don't want that.
So you might have to type IO and then hit escape on your keyboard and then type in the parentheses.
But this is what we want.
We're just calling a function named IO.
That JavaScript file that we just included in the footer is going to make this function available within
the global browser scope.
This function will open a connection between the browser and our server.
Now we don't want that socket connection to just float in outer space.
We would want to keep it somewhere so we can access it later on.
So at the start of this line, let's say this dot socket equals and then call it cool, let's go ahead
and save this.
And now be sure to open up your command line so that we can see any console that log messages here in
our text editor.
OK, at this point back in the browser.
Be sure to refresh.
So you're using the latest JavaScript and now just refreshing.
Should not show any console that log messages here.
But when I open the chat box, so when I click on this chat icon now in our command line, we should
see a new user connected.
Perfect.
We have now established an ongoing connection between the browser and server.
At this point, let's give ourselves a new goal to work towards.
Let's set things up so that when you type a message into the chat field and then press enter to submit
the message.